We'll start off by looking at
product design fundamentals.
What exactly is product design or
digital product design?
And let's be clear,
I'm not gonna start teaching you
how to make a chair, for example.
But when it comes to digital
product design, what exactly is it?
How is it different from
our traditional web design?
So we're gonna explore those kind of
fundamental principles of the discipline
and how it's different.
So let's begin with, well,
what is product design?
Now, of course there is no
universal agreement about this,
cuz Perish the thought we have
standards in our industry.
And it could be very confusing
cuz you might think, well,
I've done a little bit of designing apps,
therefore am I a product designer,
or am I a UX designer, or
am I an experience designer, or
am I a UI designer, and so it goes on?
Truth is, it doesn't really matter
what you call yourself, right?
[LAUGH] Whatever wins you
the job is my attitude.
But for our sake as we talk about
product design as a discipline,
really it's about the process
of conceptualizing, creating,
and refining digital products basically
like SaaS apps or software interfaces.
So it's a kind of blend of
user experience design,
user interface design,
and interaction design.
All right,
that probably doesn't overly help you
to understand what product design is.
So let's try a little illustration
instead, a Info Graphic.
So if you imagine kind of the work
that we do as digital designers,
he uses the broadest term that you
can possibly come up with, right?
At one end of the spectrum
of kind of web-based
technologies is the informational
end of the spectrum.
So we're talking about document-based
websites such as news sites,
marketing sites,
that kind of thing, right?
Government websites,
all of those type of sites.
And then at the other end of the spectrum,
we've got task-orientated web
apps such as design tools,
accounting apps, online software,
that kind of thing.
So actually, Figma itself is a SaaS app,
it's a web app that runs
through web technology.
Now in the middle, you've got a whole
range of different things that are both
interactive and informational.
So an e-commerce site has got
interactive elements to it, but
it's also got informational
product information on there.
And then social sites, you could argue or
somewhere in between, right?
So it's very much a spectrum, and
we kind of work all along that spectrum.
So that end of the spectrum
the informational end of the spectrum,
I'm gonna call that web design, right?
I noticed I'm saying, I'm gonna call it
that because other people I'm sure would
have other names for it.
And then at the other end of the spectrum,
we're talking about product design, okay?
So that is the end of the spectrum
we're gonna be looking at today, right?
And so,
I wanted to clarify that up front because
obviously that makes a big difference.
Many of the things I talk about today will
apply across the whole spectrum, right?
And you don't need to
necessarily specialize in one
part of that spectrum, right?
Don't feel that if you call
yourself a UX designer,
you only get to work on
the informational end.
Or if you call yourself
even a web designer,
you only get to work on the informational
end, you don't think that if you call
yourself a product designer,
you only ever get to work on web apps.
The reality is that over your career,
you will probably work in a lot
of different areas, okay?
So I, for example, call myself a UX
designer, but I spend as much time working
on web apps as I do working on
informational websites, right?
So a lot of the skills are transferable,
but
there is more to product
design than you might think.
It's very easy to make an assumption
that you understand a discipline
simply because you work in an adjacent
discipline, if that makes sense.
This is this is an example
of how old I am, right?
That when I trained, when I started my
career, the web didn't exist, okay?
And I remember a time when print designers
went, yeah, we can do the web too, right?
Which was absurd, they had no
understanding of the web, right?
And equally,
I remember a time a little bit later,
when those very same web designers who
moaned at the print designers, right,
started turning around and saying,
yeah, we can do mobile too, right?
So there are specialisms,
there are differences, but
there are also transferable skills, right?
So, we need to be aware of
the unique challenges that
are associated with working on web apps,
right?
I'm doing the more product
design end of things.
And to me, I mean,
I'm sure there are lots of others as well,
but the three that really
stand out to me is first,
that when it comes to web apps,
there is repeated use, right?
So you think about it.
Think about the web apps that you use,
right?
The chances are,
you use them fairly regularly, okay?
You open Figma every day,
probably multiple times a day,
you live in that thing maybe, right?
Even with certain e-commerce sites which
are somewhere in the middle like Amazon.
I'm on Amazon way more than
I probably should be, okay?
Or Netflix, right?
I'm in and out of that app all the time.
Now, compare that to more informational
based websites, all right?
You may be visit them once in a blue moon.
Okay, I don't get up in the morning go,
right, I'm gonna go visit the UK
government website today because that's
what I do on a Monday, you know?
You go when you have to.
So that element of repeated
use means that a minor
point of friction can become irritating
when you encounter it regularly.
You can put up, if the UK government
website is a bit difficult to use,
it's not the end of the world,
I maybe visit it once a year, right?
If Figma has a little thing where I have
to go through two drop downs rather than
one, I freak the hell out because it's so
annoying when you have to do it for
the 50,000th time.
So being aware of that creates a unique
challenge that product designers
face more than informational designers,
I'll throw out another random name for
these things, you can see how little
I care about the names of things.
So that's one thing to bear in mind,
the second challenge is the complexity.
So when it comes to
document-based websites,
the biggest challenge you really
have is navigation, right?
You've got to navigate around that app and
maybe filling in a form, okay?
That's about as bad as it gets from
a user interaction point of view.
But when you move into any kind
of web app, then suddenly that
complexity of the tasks that people
are trying to complete skyrockets.
And so, there is very complicated
range of functionality that somebody
might be doing when working with a web
app that they wouldn't necessarily
be facing if they were working
just on an information website.
So that's the second problem.
And the third problem is something that
we touched on in one of the questions
in the user research and testing,
is this concept of procedural knowledge.
Now, for those of you who don't
know what procedural knowledge is,
is that,
we learned to do things by habit, right?
So if we do something and it works for
us, we do it again, and again, and again.
And we learn that, and even if
that's not the best way of doing it,
it gets us to the results, so
we're kind of happy with it.
So the classic example,
have you ever seen somebody type in
a whole website address into
the Google search box, right?
They do that because they did it once and
it worked.
And so, they do it again,
and again, and again.
And then they just select the first thing
from the dropdown list and they get on
the website, that's a whole extra step
than if you just typed in the address bar.
But people do that because
they've learned that it works,
that's procedural knowledge.
So, I could say to you,
let's think of a website that
most of you go to at some point.
Well, let's pick Amazon.
Everybody been to Amazon relatively
recently or fairly often, right?
So if I said to you,
where's the search box on Amazon, right?
You'll probably picture in
your head that site and
that the search box is kind of
in the middle at the top, right?
Or if I said to you, where's
the shopping cart on Amazon, right?
Or indeed on any e-commerce site,
you're almost certainly going to say.
>> Upper right.
>> Upper right, okay?
So there are procedural knowledges that
are specific to a site, right, and
then there are also procedural knowledge
of our expectations of how websites
on a whole work, right?
Like shopping basket, top right,
or navigation, cross top,
down the left-hand side, right?
So we've learned these behaviors.
Now, why does this matter in terms of
a challenge for web apps in particular?
Well, if we're using something
continually, if we're using Figma day in,
day out, if we're using our banking
app day in and day out, right?
If you move any of those elements,
you break people's procedural knowledge,
suddenly they don't understand,
where's that thing gone, right?
If Amazon moved their shopping basket
from the top right to the top left,
all hell would break loose.
And you see this every time something
like Facebook redesign, right,
everybody flips out.
It sometimes makes the news that people
are up in arms about the fact that this
app has changed.
So we've got this added component
because people are using the app on
a regular basis that if you break
their procedural knowledge,
even to make it better,
right, it causes problems.
So those are the three big challenges
that you need to bear in mind when you're
talking about building and
working on web apps.
Product design has a lot
of similarities and
a lot of crossovers with any other
form of UX design or web design,
but it also has some unique challenges
that we need to be aware of.